Hello again!
In this video, we are going to look at implementing a concurrent queue. The C++ library already provides
an std::queue, so let's remind ourselves what that does.
This is what is known as a first in, first out data structure.
If you think of this as being like a queue of humans,
so they all stand there in the order that they
arrive.
The earliest arrival
is at the front and the latest arrival is at the back.
In a queue data structure, elements are stored in the order they are inserted.
The oldest element goes at
the front, the newest element goes to the back.
Elements are said to be "pushed" onto the back of the queue and "popped" off the front.
So elements are also removed in the order that they arrive.
In the C++ implementation,
removing an element from the queue actually involves two separate operations.
The first one is you call front() to get the value of the element at the front.
This will return a reference to it.
Then you call pop(), which will actually remove the element from the front without returning anything.
This is different from the way that queues in most languages work.
In most languages, when you call pop(),
it returns the value and removes the element in one single operation.
The problem is, in C++98, that would not be exception-safe.  There were really only two options.
One was to return the front element by reference and then when the element is removed, you then have
a reference to something that no longer exists.
The alternative was to return it by value, which means calling the copy constructor,
so you would make
a copy of the value, then remove the element and then return the copy.
The problem is that copy constructors can throw exceptions,
and if you get an exception after
you have removed the element, then that element is completely lost.
There is no way that anyone can get its value.
So that is why they had to do that way. In C++11, of course,  you can return by move,
which solves all
these problems because move operations  cannot throw.
Well, they should not throw!
If pop() is called on an empty container.
the behaviour is undefined.
So you might want to pause the video for a couple of minutes and see if
you can think of any reasons why this might be problematic in a multithreaded program.
OK, well, I have got three reasons, or maybe two and a half.
The first one is the library guarantees on container objects.
If you have the same instance, which is accessed from multiple threads and there is modification, then
there is a data race.
So this means we cannot use a queue directly. We have to protect it.
There is also a race condition between calling front() and calling pop()
when we remove an element.
If we call front() and we get the value of the first element and then
we are interrupted and some other thread runs and calls pop(), then we wake up and call pop() again.
The element that we popped is not the one with the value that we got.
So we have an inconsistency in our program.
The other problematic issue is the undefined behaviour if we call pop() on an empty queue.
So we need to implement a concurrent queue and the easiest way to do that is to write a wrapper class about the
standard
queue. We have a standard
queue instance as a member of the class and we also have a mutex as another member of that class.
The way this will work is that each of our member functions will lock the mutex,
then it will call
the corresponding member function or member functions of the standard queue member.
And then it
will unlock the mutex.
So that should all be thread-safe, because only one thread can access the queue member at any one time.
So you might like to pause the video for a couple of minutes and think about how you would implement
this class.
How you would write the member functions?
OK, so this is what I propose to do. For the special member functions: constructor, copy constructor,
destructor and so on, we are just going to use the defaults,
which will call the corresponding functions
on the data members.
The push member function is going to lock the mutex. It will call the push member function of the standard
queue member.
It will pass its argument to that call.
When that call returns, it will unlock the mutex.
The pop member function is only a little more complex.
It is going to lock the mutex,
it's going to call the front member function of the queue member,
and it is going to copy the return value
into its argument.
This is going to take a reference to some variable of the element type.
Then, while it is still under the lock,
it is going to call the pop member function of the queue to
remove the element, and then when that returns, it will unlock the mutex.
And we are also going to do something sensible if it is called on an empty queue.
So, again, you might like to pause the video and think about what happens if there is an exception.
Is there anything in here that can throw an exception?
And if so, will it be safe?
There are a couple of possibilities.
One is when we call the queue's push(), we are going to copy the argument and that copy could throw.
In that case, we don't actually get to call push() on the queue member,
we do not modify the queue
and then everything is left as it was.
And then if we use some wrapper objects like the lock guard or unique lock, the mutex will be automatically unlocked
when the destructors are called.
In the pop function, we again have a copy constructor.
In that case, all that we have done is to call
the front member function. We have just looked at the first element in the queue.
We do not actually get to call pop.
So, again, the queue is unmodified.
So that does not actually affect anything.
And the mutex will be automatically unlocked when the destructors
are called.
So we have actually provided the strong exception guarantee.
If an exception is thrown, then everything will be left as it was.
OK, so here is our class definition. We are going to make it a template class so we can store any type
of element inside it.
We have a mutex and a queue as members. We are going to use the defaults for the special functions. I put
the constructor in just to make it obvious that we have not forgotten.
The push member function is going to lock the mutex using a lock guard, and it is going to call push on the
underlying queue.
It will pass the argument that we are pushing onto the queue.
And then when this returns, the mutex will be unlocked.
The function will again lock the mutex. We check if the queue is empty and if it is, we throw an exception.
If the queue is not empty, we are still under the lock,
so no one else can come along and modify the queue.
And then we get the front element and we remove the element from the queue,
and then the mutex will be
unlocked.
The exception that we throw is just a very simple one derived from the standard exception. We provide
a couple of constructors which are needed for making it compile.
I have also got a program to test it. So we create an instance of our concurrent queue.
There is a thread which
is going to call pop.
This is going to read data off the queue.
There is the call to pop.
I put some print statements in, so we can see what is going on.
I have also put a try/catch block around it, just in case it does throw when we access an empty queue.
There is a writer thread, which is going to call push.
And then in the main function, we launch these threads and we wait for them.
So we start by creating the writer thread. This is going to push some data onto the queue,
and then
the reader will call pop and get the data. That is all
Okay.
Now, if I move this sleep statement out of the main and into the writer thread.
So this means the writer thread is going to sleep before it pushes anything onto the queue,
and that
means when the reader thread starts, it is going to see an empty queue.
So let's see how it handles this.
So the reader thread starts up, there is nothing on the queue, and then we get the empty queue exception.
And eventually
the writer thread wakes up, it calls push, but there is nobody there to read it.
We are throwing an exception when the queue is empty, which is better than doing - who knows what?
But
we could improve this.
This is a multithreaded program, so it is possible that if we hang around for a while,
some other thread
will come along and push some data onto the queue, and then it will be safe for us to pop it.
So instead of throwing an exception, we can wait until the queue becomes populated.
And we can do that
with a condition variable. In the thread that calls pop, we don't call pop straight away.
We call wait on the condition variable
first.
In the thread that calls push, we notify the condition variable and then that will wake up the thread
that calls pop.
And then it will be able to go ahead and actually do the pop operation.
We saw when we looked at condition variables, that there can be spurious and lost wake ups.
In fact, we saw one just then. A lost wake up where the reader thread ran before there was any data.
And we can avoid that by adding a predicate argument when we call wait.
This predicate is going to
check the queue.
If the queue is empty, then we continue waiting.
If the queue is not empty, then it is safe for us to continue and pop the data off the queue.
So you might like to pause the video and have a go at implementing this.
Right, so we have modified the class definition slightly.
We have added a condition variable as a member.
And then when we call push, we notify the condition variable, so that will signal that there is data.
And threads which are waiting to read, will be able to wake up and read the data.
In the pop member function, we have a call to wait.
And then we have a predicate function which is going to check the queue member. It is going to call the empty()
member function of this
queue.
And if this member function returns true, the queue is still empty and we continue waiting.
If it returns false, then we can proceed
and get the data off the queue.
And the test program is the same as before.
So let's try this out.
So we have our reader thread, which is waiting for data. Then the writer thread writes the data. It notifies
the condition variable,
then the condition variable wakes up the reader thread and the reader thread
can get the data.
So in conclusion, this is a fairly simple concurrent queue.
It is an example of what is known as
coarse-grained locking,
which means that the entire data structure is locked and only one thread can
access the queue at any one time.
So in effect, when the program accesses the queue, it becomes single threaded.
Adding the condition variable makes the program more flexible and also makes it slightly less coarse-grained.
If we have an empty queue and a thread that is trying to call pop, then other threads will be able to run and
call member functions.
For example, they could query the size of the queue.
And that can carry on until some data is pushed
in the queue.
And then it goes back to being single-threaded again, so that the thread can safely call pop.
A more efficient solution would be to use lock-free programming,
which would allow more threads
to access the queue, provided they are doing different things
and it would also be more efficient because
locking mutexes is very time consuming.
Unfortunately, lock-free programming is much more difficult.
So that would have to wait for another course.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!